2
A spacecraft in deep space uses jets of hot gas from its thrusters to change its velocity. Fig. 2.1
shows a side view of the spacecraft and some of its thrusters.
upwards
thruster B
thruster A
thruster C
0.40 m
centre of gravity
1.6 m
leftwards
Fig. 2.1 (not to scale)
Thruster A is a distance of 1.6 m leftwards from the centre of gravity of the spacecraft. Thruster C
is a distance of 0.40 m upwards from the centre of gravity of the spacecraft.
Thrusters A and B can produce forces on the spacecraft in the upwards direction only.
Thruster C can produce a force on the spacecraft in the leftwards direction only.
All the thrusters shown produce forces entirely in the same plane as the centre of gravity.
(a) (i) Thruster A is activated, producing a force of 60 N upwards on the spacecraft. Thruster C
is also activated, producing a force of 220 N in the leftwards direction on the spacecraft.
Calculate the resultant moment due to these forces about the centre of gravity.
resultant moment =  N m [2]
(ii) State and explain whether the forces from A and C are a couple.
[1]
(b) Thrusters A and C are now switched off and the spacecraft is stationary. Thruster B is
activated at time t1, producing a constant force on the spacecraft until the fuel runs out at time
t2. As the fuel is used, the total mass of the spacecraft decreases.
On Fig. 2.2, sketch the variation of speed of the spacecraft with time from t1 to t2.
speed
time
0
t1
t2
Fig. 2.2
[2]
(c) The spacecraft now splits apart into a carrier and a payload as shown in Fig. 2.3.
upwards
carrier
payload
Fig. 2.3
During the split, an average force of 5500 N acts on the payload for a time of 0.36 s. The
velocity of the payload increases by 8.5 m s-1 in the upwards direction.
The combined mass of the carrier and payload is 2.5 × 103 kg.
(i) State the principle of conservation of momentum.
[2]
(ii) Show that the mass of the payload is 230 kg.
[2]
(iii) Calculate the magnitude of the change in velocity of the carrier.
change in velocity =  m s-1 [3]
